SAT VOCABULARY REFERENCE
396 SAT vocabulary words with definitions, synonyms, and example sentences

================================================================================

INTIMATION
Definition: an indirect suggestion
Synonyms: hint, indication, insinuation
Example: Mr. Brinford's intimation that he would soon pass away occurred when he began to discuss how to distribute his belongings among his children.

INTRACTABLE
Definition: difficult to manipulate, unmanageable
Synonyms: stubborn, unruly, obstinate
Example: There was no end in sight to the intractable conflict between the warring countries.

INTRANSIGENT
Definition: refusing to compromise, often on an extreme opinion
Synonyms: inflexible, uncompromising, stubborn
Example: The intransigent child said he would have 12 scoops of ice cream, or he would bang his head against the wall until his mother fainted from fear.

INTREPID
Definition: brave in the face of danger
Synonyms: fearless, courageous, bold
Example: After scaling a live volcano prior to its eruption, the explorer was praised for his intrepid attitude.

INUNDATE
Definition: to flood with abundance
Synonyms: overwhelm, swamp, deluge
Example: Because I am the star of a new sitcom, my fans are sure to inundate me with fan mail and praise.

INURE
Definition: to cause someone or something to become accustomed to a situation
Synonyms: harden, accustom, habituate
Example: Twenty years in the salt mines inured the man to the discomforts of dirt and grime.

INVECTIVE
Definition: an angry verbal attack
Synonyms: abuse, vituperation, diatribe
Example: My mother's irrational invective against the way I dress only made me decide to dye my hair green.

INVETERATE
Definition: stubbornly established by habit
Synonyms: habitual, chronic, confirmed
Example: I'm the first to admit that I'm an inveterate coffee drinker—I drink four cups a day.

INVIOLABLE
Definition: secure from assault
Synonyms: sacred, untouchable, impregnable
Example: Nobody was ever able to break into Batman's inviolable Batcave.

IRASCIBLE
Definition: easily angered
Synonyms: irritable, testy, short-tempered
Example: At the smallest provocation, my irascible cat will begin scratching and clawing.

IRIDESCENT
Definition: showing rainbow colors
Synonyms: shimmering, opalescent, lustrous
Example: The bride's large diamond ring was iridescent in the afternoon sun.

IRREVERENCE
Definition: disrespect
Synonyms: impiety, disrespect, blasphemy
Example: The irreverence displayed by the band that marched through the chapel disturbed many churchgoers.

IRREVOCABLE
Definition: incapable of being taken back
Synonyms: irreversible, permanent, final
Example: The Bill of Rights is an irrevocable part of American law.

JUBILANT
Definition: extremely joyful, happy
Synonyms: elated, exultant, ecstatic
Example: The crowd was jubilant when the firefighter carried the woman from the flaming building.

JUDICIOUS
Definition: having or exercising sound judgment
Synonyms: wise, prudent, sensible
Example: When the judicious king decided to compromise rather than send his army to its certain death, he was applauded.

JUXTAPOSITION
Definition: the act of placing two things next to each other for implicit comparison
Synonyms: proximity, contrast, comparison
Example: The interior designer admired my juxtaposition of the yellow couch and green table.

KNELL
Definition: the solemn sound of a bell, often indicating a death
Synonyms: toll, chime, death knell
Example: Echoing throughout our village, the funeral knell made the stormy day even more grim.

KUDOS
Definition: praise for an achievement
Synonyms: acclaim, praise, recognition
Example: After the performance, the reviewers gave the opera singer kudos for a job well done.

LACERATION
Definition: a cut, tear
Synonyms: wound, gash, incision
Example: Because he fell off his bike into a rosebush, the paperboy's skin was covered with lacerations.

LACONIC
Definition: terse in speech or writing
Synonyms: concise, brief, succinct
Example: The author's laconic style has won him many followers who dislike wordiness.

LANGUID
Definition: sluggish from fatigue or weakness
Synonyms: lethargic, listless, weak
Example: In the summer months, the great heat makes people languid and lazy.

LARCENY
Definition: obtaining another's property by theft or trickery
Synonyms: theft, robbery, stealing
Example: When my car was not where I had left it, I realized that I was a victim of larceny.

LARGESS
Definition: the generous giving of lavish gifts
Synonyms: generosity, munificence, bounty
Example: My boss demonstrated great largess by giving me a new car.

LATENT
Definition: hidden, but capable of being exposed
Synonyms: dormant, concealed, potential
Example: Sigmund's dream represented his latent paranoid obsession with other people's shoes.

LAUDATORY
Definition: expressing admiration or praise
Synonyms: complimentary, approving, praising
Example: Such laudatory comments are unusual from someone who is usually so reserved in his opinions.

LAVISH
Definition: given without limits; to give without limits
Synonyms: abundant, generous, profuse
Example: Because they had worked very hard, the performers appreciated the critic's lavish praise.

LEGERDEMAIN
Definition: deception, sleight-of-hand
Synonyms: trickery, deception, chicanery
Example: Smuggling the French plants through customs by claiming that they were fake was a remarkable bit of legerdemain.

LENIENT
Definition: demonstrating tolerance or gentleness
Synonyms: permissive, indulgent, forgiving
Example: Because Professor Oglethorpe allowed his students to choose their final grades, the other teachers believed that he was excessively lenient.

LETHARGIC
Definition: in a state of sluggishness or apathy
Synonyms: sluggish, listless, torpid
Example: When Jean Claude explained to his boss that he was lethargic and didn't feel like working that day, the boss fired him.

LIABILITY
Definition: something for which one is legally responsible, usually involving a disadvantage or risk; a handicap, burden
Synonyms: responsibility, burden, disadvantage
Example: The bungee-jumping tower was a great liability for the owners of the carnival.

LIBERTARIAN
Definition: advocating principles of liberty and free will
Synonyms: freedom-loving, democratic, individualistic
Example: The dissatisfied subjects overthrew the monarch and replaced him with a libertarian ruler who respected their democratic principles.

LICENTIOUS
Definition: displaying a lack of moral or legal restraints
Synonyms: immoral, dissolute, debauched
Example: Marilee has always been fascinated by the licentious private lives of politicians.

LIMPID
Definition: clear, transparent
Synonyms: clear, lucid, crystalline
Example: Mr. Johnson's limpid writing style greatly pleased readers who disliked complicated novels.

LINCHPIN
Definition: something that holds separate parts together
Synonyms: cornerstone, mainstay, keystone
Example: The linchpin in the prosecution's case was the hair from the defendant's head, which was found at the scene of the crime.

LITHE
Definition: graceful, flexible, supple
Synonyms: agile, limber, flexible
Example: Although the dancers were all outstanding, Jae Sun's control of her lithe body was particularly impressive.

LITIGANT
Definition: someone engaged in a lawsuit
Synonyms: plaintiff, defendant, party
Example: When the litigants began screaming at each other, Judge Koch ordered them to be silent.

LUCID
Definition: clear, easily understandable
Synonyms: clear, coherent, intelligible
Example: Because Guenevere's essay was so lucid, I only had to read it once to understand her reasoning.

LUMINOUS
Definition: brightly shining
Synonyms: radiant, glowing, bright
Example: The light of the luminous moon graced the shoulders of the beautiful maiden.

LURID
Definition: ghastly, sensational
Synonyms: shocking, gruesome, horrifying
Example: Gideon's story, in which he described a character torturing his sister's dolls, was judged too lurid to be printed in the school's literary magazine.

MAELSTROM
Definition: a destructive whirlpool which rapidly sucks in objects
Synonyms: whirlpool, vortex, chaos
Example: Little did the explorers know that as they turned the next bend of the calm river a vicious maelstrom would catch their boat.

MAGNANIMOUS
Definition: noble, generous
Synonyms: generous, noble, benevolent
Example: Although I had already broken most of her dishes, Jacqueline was magnanimous enough to continue letting me use them.

MALEDICTION
Definition: a curse
Synonyms: curse, imprecation, hex
Example: When I was arrested for speeding, I screamed maledictions against the policeman and the entire police department.

MALEVOLENT
Definition: wanting harm to befall others
Synonyms: malicious, spiteful, evil
Example: The malevolent old man sat in the park all day, tripping unsuspecting passersby with his cane.

MALLEABLE
Definition: capable of being shaped or transformed
Synonyms: pliable, flexible, adaptable
Example: Maximillian's political opinions were so malleable that anyone he talked to was able to change his mind instantly.

MANDATE
Definition: an authoritative command
Synonyms: order, directive, command
Example: In the Old Testament, God mandates that no one should steal.

MANIFEST
Definition: easily understandable, obvious; to show plainly
Synonyms: evident, apparent, clear
Example: When I wrote the wrong sum on the chalkboard, my mistake was so manifest that the entire class burst into laughter.

MANIFOLD
Definition: diverse, varied
Synonyms: varied, diverse, multiple
Example: The popularity of Dante's Inferno is partly due to the fact that the work allows for manifold interpretations.

MAUDLIN
Definition: weakly sentimental
Synonyms: sentimental, mawkish, mushy
Example: Although many people enjoy romantic comedies, I usually find them maudlin and shallow.

MAVERICK
Definition: an independent, nonconformist person
Synonyms: nonconformist, rebel, individualist
Example: Andreas is a real maverick and always does things his own way.

MAWKISH
Definition: characterized by sick sentimentality
Synonyms: sentimental, saccharine, cloying
Example: Although some nineteenth-century critics viewed Dickens's writing as mawkish, contemporary readers have found great emotional depth in his works.

MAXIM
Definition: a common saying expressing a principle of conduct
Synonyms: proverb, adage, saying
Example: Miss Manners's etiquette maxims are both entertaining and instructional.

MEAGER
Definition: deficient in size or quality
Synonyms: scanty, sparse, insufficient
Example: My meager portion of food did nothing to satisfy my appetite.

MEDLEY
Definition: a mixture of differing things
Synonyms: mixture, assortment, variety
Example: Susannah's wardrobe contained an astonishing medley of colors, from olive green to fluorescent pink.

MENDACIOUS
Definition: having a lying, false character
Synonyms: dishonest, deceitful, untruthful
Example: The mendacious content of the tabloid magazines is at least entertaining.

MERCURIAL
Definition: characterized by rapid change or temperamentality
Synonyms: volatile, unpredictable, capricious
Example: Though he was widely respected for his mathematical proofs, the mercurial genius was impossible to live with.

MERITORIOUS
Definition: worthy of esteem or reward
Synonyms: praiseworthy, commendable, laudable
Example: Manfred was given the congressional medal of honor for his meritorious actions.

METAMORPHOSIS
Definition: the change of form, shape, substance
Synonyms: transformation, change, conversion
Example: Winnifred went to the gym every day for a year and underwent a metamorphosis from a waiflike girl to an athletic woman.

METICULOUS
Definition: extremely careful with details
Synonyms: careful, thorough, precise
Example: The ornate needlework in the bride's gown was a product of meticulous handiwork.

MITIGATE
Definition: to make less violent, alleviate
Synonyms: lessen, alleviate, reduce
Example: When I had an awful sore throat, only warm tea would mitigate the pain.

MODERATE
Definition: not extreme; one who expresses moderate opinions
Synonyms: temperate, reasonable, restrained
Example: Luckily, the restaurant we chose had moderate prices; none of us have any money.

MODICUM
Definition: a small amount of something
Synonyms: bit, trace, iota
Example: Refusing to display even a modicum of sensitivity, Henrietta announced her boss's affair in front of the entire office.

MODULATE
Definition: to pass from one state to another, especially in music
Synonyms: adjust, regulate, vary
Example: The composer wrote a piece that modulated between minor and major keys.

MOLLIFY
Definition: to soften in temper
Synonyms: placate, appease, soothe
Example: The police officer mollified the angry woman by giving her a warning instead of a ticket.

MORASS
Definition: a wet swampy bog; figuratively, something that traps and confuses
Synonyms: quagmire, swamp, predicament
Example: When Theresa lost her job, she could not get out of her financial morass.

MORES
Definition: the moral attitudes and fixed customs of a group of people
Synonyms: customs, traditions, conventions
Example: Mores change over time; many things that were tolerated in 1975 are no longer seen as being socially acceptable.

MOROSE
Definition: gloomy or sullen
Synonyms: sullen, melancholy, gloomy
Example: Jason's morose nature made him very unpleasant to talk to.

MULTIFARIOUS
Definition: having great diversity or variety
Synonyms: diverse, varied, manifold
Example: This Swiss Army knife has multifarious functions and capabilities.

MUNDANE
Definition: concerned with the world rather than with heaven, commonplace
Synonyms: ordinary, commonplace, earthly
Example: He is more concerned with the mundane issues of day-to-day life than with spiritual topics.

MUNIFICENCE
Definition: generosity in giving
Synonyms: generosity, liberality, bounty
Example: The royal family's munificence made everyone else in their country rich.

MUTABLE
Definition: able to change
Synonyms: changeable, variable, inconstant
Example: Because fashion is so mutable, what is trendy today will look outdated in five years.

MYRIAD
Definition: consisting of a very great number
Synonyms: countless, innumerable, multitudinous
Example: It was difficult to decide what to do Friday night because the city presented us with myriad possibilities for fun.

NADIR
Definition: the lowest point of something
Synonyms: bottom, low point, depths
Example: My day was boring, but the nadir came when I accidentally spilled a bowl of spaghetti on my head.

NASCENT
Definition: in the process of being born or coming into existence
Synonyms: emerging, developing, budding
Example: Unfortunately, my brilliant paper was only in its nascent form on the morning that it was due.

NEBULOUS
Definition: vaguely defined, cloudy
Synonyms: vague, unclear, hazy
Example: The transition between governments meant that who was actually in charge was a nebulous matter.

NEFARIOUS
Definition: heinously villainous
Synonyms: wicked, evil, villainous
Example: Although Dr. Meanman's nefarious plot to melt the polar icecaps was terrifying, it was so impractical that nobody really worried about it.

NEGLIGENT
Definition: habitually careless, neglectful
Synonyms: careless, neglectful, remiss
Example: Jessie's grandfather called me a negligent fool after I left the door to his apartment unlocked even though there had been a recent string of robberies.

NEOPHYTE
Definition: someone who is young or inexperienced
Synonyms: beginner, novice, newcomer
Example: As a neophyte in the literary world, Malik had trouble finding a publisher for his first novel.

NOCTURNAL
Definition: relating to or occurring during the night
Synonyms: nighttime, night, nightly
Example: Jackie was a nocturnal person; she would study until dawn and sleep until the evening.

NOISOME
Definition: unpleasant, offensive, especially to the sense of smell
Synonyms: foul, offensive, noxious
Example: Nobody would enter the stalls until the horse's noisome leavings were taken away.

NOMADIC
Definition: wandering from place to place
Synonyms: wandering, itinerant, roving
Example: In the first six months after college, Jose led a nomadic life, living in New York, California, and Idaho.

NOMINAL
Definition: trifling, insignificant
Synonyms: minimal, token, insignificant
Example: Because he was moving the following week and needed to get rid of his furniture more than he needed money, Jordan sold everything for a nominal fee.

NONCHALANT
Definition: having a lack of concern, indifference
Synonyms: casual, indifferent, unconcerned
Example: Although deep down she was very angry, Marsha acted in a nonchalant manner when she found out that her best friend had used her clothing without asking.

NONDESCRIPT
Definition: lacking a distinctive character
Synonyms: ordinary, unremarkable, plain
Example: I was surprised when I saw the movie star in person because she looked nondescript.

NOTORIOUS
Definition: widely and unfavorably known
Synonyms: infamous, disreputable, scandalous
Example: Jacob was notorious for always arriving late at parties.

NOVICE
Definition: a beginner, someone without training or experience
Synonyms: beginner, neophyte, amateur
Example: Because we were all novices at yoga, our instructor decided to begin with the basics.

NOXIOUS
Definition: harmful, unwholesome
Synonyms: harmful, toxic, poisonous
Example: Environmentalists showed that the noxious weeds were destroying the insects' natural habitats.

NUANCE
Definition: a slight variation in meaning, tone, expression
Synonyms: subtlety, shade, distinction
Example: The nuances of the poem were not obvious to the casual reader, but the professor was able to point them out.

NURTURE
Definition: to assist the development of
Synonyms: foster, cultivate, nourish
Example: Although Serena had never watered the plant, which was about to die, Javier was able to nurture it back to life.

OBDURATE
Definition: unyielding to persuasion or moral influences
Synonyms: stubborn, inflexible, obstinate
Example: The obdurate old man refused to take pity on the kittens.

OBFUSCATE
Definition: to render incomprehensible
Synonyms: confuse, obscure, muddle
Example: The detective did not want to answer the newspaperman's questions, so he obfuscated the truth.

OBLIQUE
Definition: diverging from a straight line or course, not straightforward
Synonyms: indirect, evasive, slanted
Example: Martin's oblique language confused those who listened to him.

OBLIVIOUS
Definition: lacking consciousness or awareness of something
Synonyms: unaware, unconscious, heedless
Example: Oblivious to the burning smell emanating from the kitchen, my father did not notice that the rolls in the oven were burned until much too late.

OBSCURE
Definition: unclear, partially hidden
Synonyms: unclear, vague, indistinct
Example: Because he was standing in the shadows, his features were obscure.

OBSEQUIOUS
Definition: excessively compliant or submissive
Synonyms: servile, fawning, sycophantic
Example: Mark acted like Janet's servant, obeying her every request in an obsequious manner.

OBSOLETE
Definition: no longer used, out of date
Synonyms: outdated, antiquated, archaic
Example: With the inventions of tape decks and CDs, which both have better sound and are easier to use, eight-track players are now entirely obsolete.

OBSTINATE
Definition: not yielding easily, stubborn
Synonyms: stubborn, headstrong, unyielding
Example: The obstinate child refused to leave the store until his mother bought him a candy bar.

OBSTREPEROUS
Definition: noisy, unruly
Synonyms: boisterous, rowdy, unruly
Example: Billy's obstreperous behavior prompted the librarian to ask him to leave the reading room.

OBTUSE
Definition: lacking quickness of sensibility or intellect
Synonyms: dull, slow, dense
Example: Political opponents warned that the prime minister's obtuse approach to foreign policy would embroil the nation in mindless war.

ODIOUS
Definition: instilling hatred or intense displeasure
Synonyms: hateful, detestable, repugnant
Example: Mark was assigned the odious task of cleaning the cat's litter box.

OFFICIOUS
Definition: offering one's services when they are neither wanted nor needed
Synonyms: meddlesome, intrusive, interfering
Example: Brenda resented Allan's officious behavior when he selected colors that might best improve her artwork.

OMINOUS
Definition: foreboding or foreshadowing evil
Synonyms: threatening, menacing, sinister
Example: The fortuneteller's ominous words flashed through my mind as the hooded figure approached me in the alley.

ONEROUS
Definition: burdensome
Synonyms: burdensome, oppressive, taxing
Example: My parents lamented that the pleasures of living in a beautiful country estate no longer outweighed the onerous mortgage payments.

OPULENT
Definition: characterized by rich abundance verging on ostentation
Synonyms: luxurious, lavish, sumptuous
Example: The opulent furnishings of the dictator's private compound contrasted harshly with the meager accommodations of her subjects.

ORATION
Definition: a speech delivered in a formal or ceremonious manner
Synonyms: speech, address, discourse
Example: The prime minister was visibly shaken when the unruly parliament interrupted his oration about failed domestic policies.

ORNATE
Definition: highly elaborate, excessively decorated
Synonyms: elaborate, decorative, embellished
Example: The ornate styling of the new model of luxury car could not compensate for the poor quality of its motor.

ORTHODOX
Definition: conventional, conforming to established protocol
Synonyms: conventional, traditional, established
Example: The company's profits dwindled because the management pursued orthodox business policies that were incompatible with new industrial trends.

OSCILLATE
Definition: to sway from one side to the other
Synonyms: fluctuate, waver, vacillate
Example: My uncle oscillated between buying a station wagon to transport his family and buying a sports car to satisfy his boyhood fantasies.

OSTENSIBLE
Definition: appearing as such, seemingly
Synonyms: apparent, seeming, supposed
Example: Jack's ostensible reason for driving was that airfare was too expensive, but in reality, he was afraid of flying.

OSTENTATIOUS
Definition: excessively showy, glitzy
Synonyms: showy, flashy, pretentious
Example: On the palace tour, the guide focused on the ostentatious decorations and spoke little of the royal family's history.

OSTRACISM
Definition: exclusion from a group
Synonyms: exclusion, banishment, rejection
Example: Beth risked ostracism if her roommates discovered her flatulence.

PACIFIC
Definition: soothing
Synonyms: peaceful, calming, tranquil
Example: The chemistry professor's pacific demeanor helped the class remain calm after the experiment exploded.

PALATABLE
Definition: agreeable to the taste or sensibilities
Synonyms: acceptable, pleasant, agreeable
Example: Despite the unpleasant smell, the exotic cheese was quite palatable.

PALETTE
Definition: a range of colors or qualities
Synonyms: range, spectrum, variety
Example: The palette of colors utilized in the painting was equaled only by the range of intense emotions the piece evoked.

PALLIATE
Definition: to reduce the severity of
Synonyms: alleviate, ease, relieve
Example: The doctor trusted that the new medication would palliate her patient's discomfort.

PALLID
Definition: lacking color
Synonyms: pale, wan, ashen
Example: Dr. Van Helsing feared that Lucy's pallid complexion was due to an unexplained loss of blood.

PANACEA
Definition: a remedy for all ills or difficulties
Synonyms: cure-all, remedy, solution
Example: Doctors wish there was a single panacea for every disease, but sadly there is not.

PARADIGM
Definition: an example that is a perfect pattern or model
Synonyms: model, pattern, example
Example: Because the new SUV was so popular, it became the paradigm upon which all others were modeled.

PARADOX
Definition: an apparently contradictory statement that is perhaps true
Synonyms: contradiction, anomaly, inconsistency
Example: The diplomat refused to acknowledge the paradox that negotiating a peace treaty would demand more resources than waging war.

PARAGON
Definition: a model of excellence or perfection
Synonyms: model, exemplar, ideal
Example: The mythical Helen of Troy was considered a paragon of female beauty.

PARAMOUNT
Definition: greatest in importance, rank, character
Synonyms: supreme, foremost, primary
Example: It was paramount that the bomb squad disconnect the blue wire before removing the fuse.

PARIAH
Definition: an outcast
Synonyms: outcast, exile, outsider
Example: Following the discovery of his plagiarism, Professor Hurley was made a pariah in all academic circles.

PARODY
Definition: a satirical imitation
Synonyms: satire, mockery, caricature
Example: A hush fell over the classroom when the teacher returned to find Deborah acting out a parody of his teaching style.

PARSIMONY
Definition: frugality, stinginess
Synonyms: frugality, stinginess, thrift
Example: Many relatives believed that my aunt's wealth resulted from her parsimony.

PARTISAN
Definition: a follower, adherent
Synonyms: supporter, follower, adherent
Example: The king did not believe that his rival could round up enough partisans to overthrow the monarchy.

PATENT
Definition: readily seen or understood, clear
Synonyms: obvious, evident, clear
Example: The reason for Jim's abdominal pain was made patent after the doctor performed a sonogram.

PATHOLOGY
Definition: a deviation from the normal
Synonyms: abnormality, disease, disorder
Example: Dr. Hastings had difficulty identifying the precise nature of Brian's pathology.

PATHOS
Definition: an emotion of sympathy
Synonyms: pity, sympathy, compassion
Example: Martha filled with pathos upon discovering the scrawny, shivering kitten at her door.

PAUCITY
Definition: small in quantity
Synonyms: scarcity, shortage, dearth
Example: Gilbert lamented the paucity of twentieth century literature courses available at the college.

PEJORATIVE
Definition: derogatory, uncomplimentary
Synonyms: derogatory, disparaging, belittling
Example: The evening's headline news covered an international scandal caused by a pejorative statement the famous senator had made in reference to a foreign leader.

PELLUCID
Definition: easily intelligible, clear
Synonyms: clear, lucid, transparent
Example: Wishing his book to be pellucid to the common man, Albert Camus avoided using complicated grammar when composing The Stranger.

PENCHANT
Definition: a tendency, partiality, preference
Synonyms: inclination, liking, fondness
Example: Jill's dinner parties quickly became monotonous on account of her penchant for Mexican dishes.

PENITENT
Definition: remorseful, regretful
Synonyms: remorseful, repentant, contrite
Example: The jury's verdict may have been more lenient if the criminal had appeared penitent for his gruesome crimes.

PENULTIMATE
Definition: next to last
Synonyms: second-to-last, penultimate, next-to-last
Example: Having smoked the penultimate cigarette remaining in the pack, Cybil discarded the last cigarette and resolved to quit smoking.

PENURIOUS
Definition: miserly, stingy
Synonyms: stingy, miserly, cheap
Example: Stella complained that her husband's penurious ways made it impossible to live the lifestyle she felt she deserved.

PERFIDIOUS
Definition: disloyal, unfaithful
Synonyms: treacherous, disloyal, traitorous
Example: After the official was caught selling government secrets to enemy agents, he was executed for his perfidious ways.

PERFUNCTORY
Definition: showing little interest or enthusiasm
Synonyms: cursory, superficial, mechanical
Example: The radio broadcaster announced the news of the massacre in a surprisingly perfunctory manner.

PERMEATE
Definition: to spread throughout, saturate
Synonyms: pervade, penetrate, saturate
Example: Mrs. Huxtable was annoyed that the wet dog's odor had permeated the furniture's upholstery.

PERNICIOUS
Definition: extremely destructive or harmful
Synonyms: harmful, destructive, damaging
Example: The new government feared that the Communist sympathizers would have a pernicious influence on the nation's stability.

PERPLEX
Definition: to confuse
Synonyms: confuse, puzzle, bewilder
Example: Brad was perplexed by his girlfriend's suddenly distant manner.

PERSPICACITY
Definition: shrewdness, perceptiveness
Synonyms: insight, acumen, discernment
Example: The detective was too humble to acknowledge that his perspicacity was the reason for his professional success.

PERT
Definition: flippant, bold
Synonyms: lively, saucy, cheeky
Example: My parents forgave Sandra's pert humor at the dinner table because it had been so long since they had last seen her.

PERTINACIOUS
Definition: stubbornly persistent
Synonyms: persistent, tenacious, dogged
Example: Harry's parents were frustrated with his pertinacious insistence that a monster lived in his closet.

PERUSAL
Definition: a careful examination, review
Synonyms: examination, study, scrutiny
Example: The actor agreed to accept the role after a two-month perusal of the movie script.

PERVASIVE
Definition: having the tendency to spread throughout
Synonyms: widespread, prevalent, ubiquitous
Example: Stepping off the plane in Havana, I recognized the pervasive odor of sugar cane fields on fire.

PETULANCE
Definition: rudeness, irritability
Synonyms: irritability, peevishness, testiness
Example: The Nanny resigned after she could no longer tolerate the child's petulance.

PHILANTHROPIC
Definition: charitable, giving
Synonyms: charitable, benevolent, generous
Example: Many people felt that the billionaire's decision to donate her fortune to house the homeless was the ultimate philanthropic act.

PHLEGMATIC
Definition: uninterested, unresponsive
Synonyms: apathetic, sluggish, unemotional
Example: Monique feared her dog was ill after the animal's phlegmatic response to his favorite chew toy.

PILLAGE
Definition: to seize or plunder, especially in war
Synonyms: plunder, loot, ransack
Example: Invading enemy soldiers pillaged the homes scattered along the country's border.

PINNACLE
Definition: the highest point
Synonyms: peak, summit, zenith
Example: Book reviewers declared that the author's new novel was extraordinary and probably the pinnacle of Western literature.

PITHY
Definition: concisely meaningful
Synonyms: concise, terse, succinct
Example: My father's long-winded explanation was a stark contrast to his usually pithy statements.

PITTANCE
Definition: a very small amount, especially relating to money
Synonyms: trifle, peanuts, small amount
Example: Josh complained that he was paid a pittance for the great amount of work he did at the firm.

PLACATE
Definition: to ease the anger of, soothe
Synonyms: appease, pacify, mollify
Example: The man purchased a lollipop to placate his irritable son.

PLACID
Definition: calm, peaceful
Synonyms: calm, peaceful, tranquil
Example: The placid lake surface was as smooth as glass.

PLATITUDE
Definition: an uninspired remark, cliché
Synonyms: cliché, truism, banality
Example: After reading over her paper, Helene concluded that what she thought were profound insights were actually just platitudes.

PLAUDITS
Definition: enthusiastic approval, applause
Synonyms: praise, acclaim, applause
Example: The controversial new film received plaudits from even the harshest critics.

PLAUSIBLE
Definition: believable, reasonable
Synonyms: credible, believable, convincing
Example: He studied all the data and then came up with a plausible theory that took all factors into account.

PLENITUDE
Definition: an abundance
Synonyms: abundance, plenty, profusion
Example: My grandmother was overwhelmed by the plenitude of tomatoes her garden yielded this season.

PLETHORA
Definition: an abundance, excess
Synonyms: excess, surplus, overabundance
Example: The wedding banquet included a plethora of oysters piled almost three feet high.

PLIABLE
Definition: flexible
Synonyms: flexible, malleable, supple
Example: Aircraft wings are designed to be somewhat pliable so they do not break in heavy turbulence.

POIGNANT
Definition: deeply affecting, moving
Synonyms: touching, moving, emotional
Example: My teacher actually cried after reading to us the poignant final chapter of the novel.

POLEMIC
Definition: an aggressive argument against a specific opinion
Synonyms: argument, dispute, tirade
Example: My brother launched into a polemic against my arguments that capitalism was an unjust economic system.

PORTENT
Definition: an omen
Synonyms: omen, sign, warning
Example: When a black cat crossed my sister's path while she was walking to school, she took it as a portent that she would do badly on her spelling test.

POTABLE
Definition: suitable for drinking
Synonyms: drinkable, safe, clean
Example: During sea voyages it is essential that ships carry a supply of potable water because salty ocean water makes anyone who drinks it sick.

POTENTATE
Definition: one who has great power, a ruler
Synonyms: ruler, monarch, sovereign
Example: All the villagers stood along the town's main road to observe as the potentate's procession headed towards the capital.

PRAGMATIC
Definition: practical
Synonyms: practical, realistic, sensible
Example: The politician argued that while increased security measures might not fit with the lofty ideals of the nation, they were a pragmatic necessity to ensure everyone's safety.

PRECIPICE
Definition: the face of a cliff, a steep or overhanging place
Synonyms: cliff, brink, edge
Example: The mountain climber hung from a precipice before finding a handhold and pulling himself up.

PRECLUDE
Definition: to prevent
Synonyms: prevent, forestall, hinder
Example: My grandfather's large and vicious guard dog precluded anyone from entering the yard.

PRECOCIOUS
Definition: advanced, developing ahead of time
Synonyms: advanced, gifted, mature
Example: Derek was so academically precocious that by the time he was 10 years old, he was already in the ninth grade.

PREDILECTION
Definition: a preference or inclination for something
Synonyms: preference, liking, inclination
Example: Francois has a predilection for eating scrambled eggs with ketchup, though I prefer to eat eggs without any condiments.

PREPONDERANCE
Definition: superiority in importance or quantity
Synonyms: dominance, prevalence, majority
Example: Britain's preponderance of naval might secured the nation's role as a military power.

PREPOSSESSING
Definition: occupying the mind to the exclusion of other thoughts or feelings
Synonyms: attractive, appealing, charming
Example: His prepossessing appearance made it impossible for me to think of anything else.

PRESAGE
Definition: an omen
Synonyms: omen, portent, sign
Example: When my uncle's old war injury ached, he interpreted it as a presage of bad weather approaching.

PRESCIENT
Definition: to have foreknowledge of events
Synonyms: prophetic, foresighted, clairvoyant
Example: Questioning the fortune cookie's prediction, Ray went in search of the old hermit who was rumored to be prescient.

PRESCRIBE
Definition: to lay down a rule
Synonyms: dictate, ordain, decree
Example: The duke prescribed that from this point further all of the peasants living on his lands would have to pay higher taxes.

PRESUMPTUOUS
Definition: disrespectfully bold
Synonyms: bold, audacious, impudent
Example: The princess grew angry after the presumptuous noble tried to kiss her, even though he was far below her in social status.

PRETENSE
Definition: an appearance or action intended to deceive
Synonyms: deception, pretext, facade
Example: Though he actually wanted to use his parents' car to go on a date, Nick borrowed his parents' car under the pretense of attending a group study session.

PRIMEVAL
Definition: original, ancient
Synonyms: ancient, primordial, prehistoric
Example: The first primates to walk on two legs, called Australopithecus, were the primeval descendants of modern man.

PRIVATION
Definition: lacking basic necessities
Synonyms: deprivation, hardship, want
Example: After decades of rule by an oppressive government that saw nothing wrong with stealing from its citizens, the recent drought only increased the people's privation.

PROBITY
Definition: virtue, integrity
Synonyms: integrity, honesty, uprightness
Example: Because he was never viewed as a man of great probity, no one was surprised by Mr. Samson's immoral behavior.

PROCLIVITY
Definition: a strong inclination toward something
Synonyms: tendency, inclination, propensity
Example: In a sick twist of fate, Harold's childhood proclivity for torturing small animals grew into a desire to become a surgeon.

PROCURE
Definition: to obtain, acquire
Synonyms: obtain, acquire, secure
Example: The FBI was unable to procure sufficient evidence to charge the gangster with racketeering.

PROFANE
Definition: lewd, indecent
Synonyms: sacrilegious, blasphemous, irreverent
Example: Jacob's profane act of dumping frogs in the holy water in the chapel at his boarding school resulted in his dismissal.

PROFLIGATE
Definition: dissolute, extravagant
Synonyms: wasteful, reckless, dissolute
Example: The profligate gambler loved to drink, spend money, steal, cheat, and hang out with prostitutes.

PROFUSE
Definition: plentiful, abundant
Synonyms: abundant, copious, lavish
Example: The fans were profuse in their cheers for the star basketball player.

PROMULGATE
Definition: to proclaim, make known
Synonyms: announce, proclaim, publicize
Example: The film professor promulgated that both in terms of sex appeal and political intrigue, Sean Connery's James Bond was superior to Roger Moore's.

PROPAGATE
Definition: to multiply, spread out
Synonyms: spread, disseminate, proliferate
Example: Rumors of Paul McCartney's demise propagated like wildfire throughout the world.

PROPENSITY
Definition: an inclination, preference
Synonyms: tendency, inclination, bent
Example: Dermit has a propensity for dangerous activities such as bungee jumping.

PROPITIOUS
Definition: favorable
Synonyms: favorable, auspicious, promising
Example: The dark storm clouds visible on the horizon suggested that the weather would not be propitious for sailing.

PROPRIETY
Definition: the quality or state of being proper, decent
Synonyms: decorum, correctness, decency
Example: Erma's old-fashioned parents believed that her mini-skirt lacked the propriety expected of a 'nice' girl.

PROSAIC
Definition: plain, lacking liveliness
Synonyms: dull, ordinary, unimaginative
Example: Heather's prosaic recital of the poem bored the audience.

PROSCRIBE
Definition: to condemn, outlaw
Synonyms: ban, prohibit, forbid
Example: The town council voted to proscribe the sale of alcohol on weekends.

PROTEAN
Definition: able to change shape; displaying great variety
Synonyms: versatile, variable, changeable
Example: Among Nigel's protean talents was his ability to touch the tip of his nose with his tongue.

PROWESS
Definition: extraordinary ability
Synonyms: skill, expertise, mastery
Example: The musician had never taken a guitar lesson in his life, making his prowess with the instrument even more incredible.

PRUDENCE
Definition: cautious, circumspect
Synonyms: caution, wisdom, discretion
Example: After losing a fortune in a stock market crash, my father vowed to practice greater prudence in future investments.

PRURIENT
Definition: eliciting or possessing an extraordinary interest in sex
Synonyms: lustful, lascivious, salacious
Example: David's mother was shocked by the discovery of prurient reading material hidden beneath her son's mattress.

PUERILE
Definition: juvenile, immature
Synonyms: childish, immature, juvenile
Example: The judge demanded order after the lawyer's puerile attempt to object by stomping his feet on the courtroom floor.

PUGNACIOUS
Definition: quarrelsome, combative
Synonyms: combative, belligerent, aggressive
Example: Aaron's pugnacious nature led him to start several barroom brawls each month.

PULCHRITUDE
Definition: physical beauty
Synonyms: beauty, loveliness, attractiveness
Example: Several of Shakespeare's sonnets explore the pulchritude of a lovely young man.

PUNCTILIOUS
Definition: eager to follow rules or conventions
Synonyms: meticulous, scrupulous, precise
Example: Punctilious Bobby, hall monitor extraordinaire, insisted that his peers follow the rules.

PUNGENT
Definition: having a pointed, sharp quality—often used to describe smells
Synonyms: sharp, acrid, strong
Example: The pungent odor in the classroom made Joseph lose his concentration during the test.

PUNITIVE
Definition: involving punishment
Synonyms: disciplinary, penal, corrective
Example: If caught smoking in the boys' room, the punitive result is immediate expulsion from school.

PUTRID
Definition: rotten, foul
Synonyms: rotten, decayed, foul
Example: Those rotten eggs smell putrid.

QUAGMIRE
Definition: a difficult situation
Synonyms: predicament, dilemma, morass
Example: We'd all like to avoid the kind of military quagmire characterized by the Vietnam War.

QUAINT
Definition: charmingly old-fashioned
Synonyms: charming, old-fashioned, picturesque
Example: Hilda was delighted by the quaint bonnets she saw in Amish country.

QUANDARY
Definition: a perplexed, unresolvable state
Synonyms: dilemma, predicament, quandary
Example: Carlos found himself in a quandary: should he choose mint chocolate chip or cookie dough?

QUELL
Definition: to control or diffuse a potentially explosive situation
Synonyms: suppress, subdue, calm
Example: The skilled leader deftly quelled the rebellion.

QUERULOUS
Definition: whiny, complaining
Synonyms: complaining, petulant, whining
Example: If deprived of his pacifier, young Brendan becomes querulous.

QUIXOTIC
Definition: idealistic, impractical
Synonyms: idealistic, unrealistic, impractical
Example: Edward entertained a quixotic desire to fall in love at first sight in a laundromat.

QUOTIDIAN
Definition: daily
Synonyms: daily, everyday, routine
Example: Ambika's quotidian routines include drinking two cups of coffee in the morning.

RAIL
Definition: to scold, protest
Synonyms: protest, complain, criticize
Example: The professor railed against the injustice of the college's tenure policy.

RANCID
Definition: having a terrible taste or smell
Synonyms: foul, putrid, rank
Example: Rob was double-dog-dared to eat the rancid egg salad sandwich.

RANCOR
Definition: deep, bitter resentment
Synonyms: bitterness, resentment, animosity
Example: When Eileen challenged me to a fight, I could see the rancor in her eyes.

RAPPORT
Definition: mutual understanding and harmony
Synonyms: harmony, affinity, connection
Example: When Margaret met her paramour, they felt an instant rapport.

RASH
Definition: hasty, incautious
Synonyms: hasty, impulsive, reckless
Example: It's best to think things over calmly and thoroughly, rather than make rash decisions.

RAUCOUS
Definition: loud, boisterous
Synonyms: loud, rowdy, noisy
Example: Sarah's neighbors called the cops when her house party got too raucous.

RAZE
Definition: to demolish, level
Synonyms: demolish, destroy, flatten
Example: The old tenement house was razed to make room for the large chain store.

REBUKE
Definition: to scold, criticize
Synonyms: reprimand, scold, admonish
Example: When the cops showed up at Sarah's party, they rebuked her for disturbing the peace.

RECALCITRANT
Definition: defiant, unapologetic
Synonyms: defiant, obstinate, rebellious
Example: Even when scolded, the recalcitrant young girl simply stomped her foot and refused to finish her lima beans.

RECAPITULATE
Definition: to sum up, repeat
Synonyms: summarize, recap, review
Example: Before the final exam, the teacher recapitulated the semester's material.

RECIPROCATE
Definition: to give in return
Synonyms: return, repay, exchange
Example: When Steve gave Samantha a sweater for Christmas, she reciprocated by giving him a kiss.

RECLUSIVE
Definition: solitary, shunning society
Synonyms: solitary, isolated, withdrawn
Example: Reclusive authors such as J.D. Salinger do not relish media attention and sometimes even enjoy holing up in remote cabins in the woods.

RECONCILE
Definition: to return to harmony; to make consistent with existing ideas
Synonyms: reunite, harmonize, resolve
Example: The feuding neighbors finally reconciled when one brought the other a delicious tuna noodle casserole.

RECTITUDE
Definition: uprightness, extreme morality
Synonyms: integrity, righteousness, virtue
Example: The priest's rectitude gave him the moral authority to counsel his parishioners.

REDOUBTABLE
Definition: formidable; commanding respect
Synonyms: formidable, impressive, fearsome
Example: The fortress looked redoubtable set against a stormy sky.

REFRACT
Definition: to distort, change
Synonyms: bend, deflect, distort
Example: The light was refracted as it passed through the prism.

REFURBISH
Definition: to restore, clean up
Synonyms: restore, renovate, revamp
Example: The dingy old chair, after being refurbished, commanded the handsome price of $200.

REFUTE
Definition: to prove wrong
Synonyms: disprove, rebut, contradict
Example: Maria refuted the president's argument as she yelled and gesticulated at the TV.

REGURGITATE
Definition: to vomit; to throw back exactly
Synonyms: vomit, repeat, reproduce
Example: Feeling sick, Chuck regurgitated his dinner.

RELEGATE
Definition: to assign to the proper place; to assign to an inferior place
Synonyms: demote, downgrade, consign
Example: After spilling a drink on a customer's shirt, the waiter found himself relegated to the least lucrative shift.

RELISH
Definition: to enjoy
Synonyms: enjoy, savor, delight in
Example: Pete always relished his bedtime snack.

REMEDIAL
Definition: intended to repair gaps in students' basic knowledge
Synonyms: corrective, therapeutic, compensatory
Example: After his teacher discovered he couldn't read, Alex was forced to enroll in remedial English.

REMISS
Definition: negligent, failing to take care
Synonyms: negligent, careless, lax
Example: The burglar gained entrance because the security guard, remiss in his duties, forgot to lock the door.

RENOVATE
Definition: restore, return to original state; to enlarge and make prettier
Synonyms: restore, refurbish, modernize
Example: The renovated antique candelabra looked as good as new.

RENOWN
Definition: honor, acclaim
Synonyms: fame, distinction, glory
Example: The young writer earned international renown by winning the Pulitzer Prize.

RENUNCIATION
Definition: to reject
Synonyms: rejection, abandonment, relinquishment
Example: Fiona's renunciation of red meat resulted in weight loss, but confused those people who thought she'd been a vegetarian for years.

REPENTANT
Definition: penitent, sorry
Synonyms: remorseful, contrite, apologetic
Example: The repentant Dennis apologized profusely for breaking his mother's vase.

REPLETE
Definition: full, abundant
Synonyms: full, abundant, brimming
Example: The unedited version was replete with naughty words.

REPOSE
Definition: to rest, lie down
Synonyms: rest, relax, recline
Example: The cat, after eating an entire can of tuna fish, reposed in the sun and took a long nap.

REPREHENSIBLE
Definition: deserving rebuke
Synonyms: blameworthy, deplorable, shameful
Example: Jean's cruel and reprehensible attempt to dump her boyfriend on his birthday led to tears and recriminations.

REPRIEVE
Definition: a temporary delay of punishment
Synonyms: pardon, respite, postponement
Example: Because the governor woke up in a particularly good mood, he granted hundreds of reprieves to prisoners.

REPROACH
Definition: to scold, disapprove
Synonyms: rebuke, criticize, censure
Example: Brian reproached the customer for failing to rewind the video he had rented.

REPROBATE
Definition: evil, unprincipled
Synonyms: scoundrel, villain, wrongdoer
Example: The reprobate criminal sat sneering in the cell.

REPROVE
Definition: to scold, rebuke
Synonyms: rebuke, reprimand, chide
Example: Lara reproved her son for sticking each and every one of his fingers into the strawberry pie.

REPUDIATE
Definition: to reject, refuse to accept
Synonyms: reject, renounce, disown
Example: Kwame made a strong case for an extension of his curfew, but his mother repudiated it with a few biting words.

REPULSE
Definition: to disgust; to push back
Synonyms: repel, disgust, rebuff
Example: Antisocial Annie tried to repulse people by neglecting to brush her teeth.

REPUTABLE
Definition: of good reputation
Synonyms: respectable, trustworthy, credible
Example: After the most reputable critic in the industry gave the novel a glowing review, sales took off.

REQUISITION
Definition: a demand for goods, usually made by an authority
Synonyms: request, demand, order
Example: During the war, the government made a requisition of supplies.

RESCIND
Definition: to take back, repeal
Synonyms: revoke, cancel, withdraw
Example: The company rescinded its offer of employment after discovering that Jane's resume was full of lies.

RESERVOIR
Definition: reserves, large supply; a body of water used for storing water
Synonyms: supply, reserve, stockpile
Example: Igor the Indomitable had quite a reservoir of strength and could lift ten tons.

RESILIENT
Definition: able to recover from misfortune; able to withstand adversity
Synonyms: flexible, adaptable, strong
Example: The resilient ballplayer quickly recovered from his wrist injury.

RESOLUTE
Definition: firm, determined
Synonyms: determined, steadfast, unwavering
Example: With a resolute glint in her eye, Catherine announced that she was set on going to college in New York City.

RESOLVE
Definition: to find a solution; to firmly decide
Synonyms: solve, settle, determine
Example: Sarah and Emma resolved their differences and shook hands.

RESPITE
Definition: a break, rest
Synonyms: break, rest, pause
Example: Justin left the pub to gain a brief respite from the smoke and noise.

RESPLENDENT
Definition: shiny, glowing
Synonyms: brilliant, radiant, magnificent
Example: The partygoers were resplendent in diamonds and fancy dress.

RESTITUTION
Definition: restoration to the rightful owner
Synonyms: compensation, reparation, repayment
Example: Many people feel that descendants of slaves should receive restitution for the sufferings of their ancestors.

RESTIVE
Definition: resistant, stubborn, impatient
Synonyms: restless, impatient, uneasy
Example: The restive audience pelted the band with mud and yelled nasty comments.

RETRACT
Definition: withdraw
Synonyms: withdraw, take back, recant
Example: As the media worked itself into a frenzy, the publicist hurriedly retracted his client's sexist statement.

REVEL
Definition: to enjoy intensely
Synonyms: delight, rejoice, celebrate
Example: Theodore reveled in his new status as Big Man on Campus.

REVERE
Definition: to esteem, show deference, venerate
Synonyms: respect, admire, venerate
Example: The doctor saved countless lives with his combination of expertise and kindness and became universally revered.

REVOKE
Definition: to take back
Synonyms: cancel, withdraw, annul
Example: After missing the curfew set by the court for eight nights in a row, Marcel's freedom of movement was revoked.

RHAPSODIZE
Definition: to engage in excessive enthusiasm
Synonyms: enthuse, gush, rave
Example: The critic rhapsodized about the movie, calling it an instant classic.

RIBALD
Definition: coarsely, crudely humorous
Synonyms: crude, vulgar, bawdy
Example: While some giggled at the ribald joke involving a parson's daughter, most sighed and rolled their eyes.

RIFE
Definition: abundant
Synonyms: abundant, widespread, prevalent
Example: Surprisingly, the famous novelist's writing was rife with spelling errors.

RUMINATE
Definition: to contemplate, reflect
Synonyms: ponder, contemplate, reflect
Example: Terry liked to ruminate while sitting on the banks of the river, staring pensively into the water.

RUSE
Definition: a trick
Synonyms: trick, ploy, stratagem
Example: Oliver concocted an elaborate ruse for sneaking out of the house to meet his girlfriend.

SACCHARINE
Definition: sickeningly sweet
Synonyms: sweet, sentimental, syrupy
Example: Tom's saccharine manner, although intended to make him popular, actually repelled his classmates.

SACROSANCT
Definition: holy, something that should not be criticized
Synonyms: sacred, inviolable, holy
Example: In the United States, the Constitution is often thought of as a sacrosanct document.

SAGACITY
Definition: shrewdness, soundness of perspective
Synonyms: wisdom, insight, discernment
Example: With remarkable sagacity, the wise old man predicted and thwarted his children's plan to ship him off to a nursing home.

SALIENT
Definition: significant, conspicuous
Synonyms: prominent, notable, striking
Example: One of the salient differences between Alison and Nancy is that Alison is a foot taller.

SALUTATION
Definition: a greeting
Synonyms: greeting, welcome, salute
Example: Andrew regularly began letters with the bizarre salutation 'Ahoy ahoy.'

SALVE
Definition: a soothing balm
Synonyms: ointment, balm, remedy
Example: After Tony applied a salve to his brilliant red sunburn, he soon felt a little better.

SANCTIMONIOUS
Definition: giving a hypocritical appearance of piety
Synonyms: self-righteous, holier-than-thou, hypocritical
Example: The sanctimonious Bertrand delivered stern lectures on the Ten Commandments to anyone who would listen, but thought nothing of stealing cars to make some cash on the side.

SANGUINE
Definition: optimistic, cheery
Synonyms: optimistic, hopeful, cheerful
Example: Polly reacted to any bad news with a sanguine smile and the chirpy cry, 'When life hands you lemons, make lemonade!'

SATIATE
Definition: to satisfy excessively
Synonyms: satisfy, fill, sate
Example: Satiated after eating far too much turkey and stuffing, Liza lay on the couch watching football and suffering from stomach pains.

SCATHING
Definition: sharp, critical, hurtful
Synonyms: harsh, severe, scornful
Example: Two hours after breaking up with Russell, Suzanne thought of the perfect scathing retort to his accusations.

SCINTILLATING
Definition: sparkling
Synonyms: brilliant, dazzling, sparkling
Example: The ice skater's scintillating rhinestone costume nearly blinded the judges.

SCRUPULOUS
Definition: painstaking, careful
Synonyms: meticulous, careful, thorough
Example: With scrupulous care, Sam cut a snowflake out of white paper.

SCURRILOUS
Definition: vulgar, coarse
Synonyms: vulgar, abusive, obscene
Example: When Bruno heard the scurrilous accusation being made about him, he could not believe it because he always tried to be nice to everyone.

SEDENTARY
Definition: sitting, settled
Synonyms: inactive, stationary, immobile
Example: The sedentary cat did little but loll in the sun.

SEMAPHORE
Definition: a visual signal
Synonyms: signal, sign, indicator
Example: Anne and Diana communicated with a semaphore involving candles and window shades.

SEMINAL
Definition: original, important, creating a field
Synonyms: influential, groundbreaking, pioneering
Example: Stephen Greenblatt's essays on Shakespeare proved to be seminal, because they initiated the critical school of New Historicism.

SENSUAL
Definition: involving sensory gratification, usually related to sex
Synonyms: sensuous, carnal, erotic
Example: With a coy smile, the guest on the blind-date show announced that he considered himself a very sensual person.

SENSUOUS
Definition: involving sensory gratification
Synonyms: pleasurable, gratifying, sensory
Example: Paul found drinking Coke, with all the little bubbles bursting on his tongue, a very sensuous experience.

SERENDIPITY
Definition: luck, finding good things without looking for them
Synonyms: luck, fortune, chance
Example: In an amazing bit of serendipity, penniless Paula found a $20 bill in the subway station.

SERENE
Definition: calm, untroubled
Synonyms: peaceful, tranquil, calm
Example: Louise stood in front of the Mona Lisa, puzzling over the famous woman's serene smile.

SERVILE
Definition: subservient
Synonyms: submissive, obsequious, slavish
Example: The servile porter crept around the hotel lobby, bowing and quaking before the guests.

SINUOUS
Definition: lithe, serpentine
Synonyms: winding, curving, serpentine
Example: With the sinuous movements of her arms, the dancer mimicked the motion of a snake.

SOBRIETY
Definition: sedate, calm
Synonyms: seriousness, solemn, temperance
Example: Jason believed that maintaining his sobriety in times of crisis was the key to success in life.

SOLICITOUS
Definition: concerned, attentive
Synonyms: attentive, caring, concerned
Example: Jim, laid up in bed with a nasty virus, enjoyed the solicitous attentions of his mother, who brought him soup and extra blankets.

SOLIPSISTIC
Definition: believing that oneself is all that exists
Synonyms: self-centered, egocentric, narcissistic
Example: Colette's solipsistic attitude completely ignored the plight of the homeless people on the street.

SOLUBLE
Definition: able to dissolve
Synonyms: dissolvable, meltable, dispersible
Example: The plot of the spy film revolved around an untraceable and water-soluble poison.

SOLVENT
Definition: a substance that can dissolve other substances; able to pay debts
Synonyms: dissolver, financially stable, liquid
Example: Upon receiving an unexpected check from her aunt, Annabelle found herself suddenly solvent.

SOMNOLENT
Definition: sleepy, drowsy
Synonyms: sleepy, drowsy, lethargic
Example: The somnolent student kept falling asleep and waking up with a jerk.

SOPHOMORIC
Definition: immature, uninformed
Synonyms: immature, juvenile, childish
Example: The mature senior rolled her eyes at the sophomoric gross-out humor of the underclassman.

SOVEREIGN
Definition: having absolute authority in a certain realm
Synonyms: supreme, paramount, autonomous
Example: The sovereign queen, with steely resolve, ordered that the traitorous nobleman be killed.

SPECULATIVE
Definition: not based in fact
Synonyms: conjectural, hypothetical, theoretical
Example: Sadly, Tessa was convicted on merely speculative evidence.

SPURIOUS
Definition: false but designed to seem plausible
Synonyms: false, bogus, counterfeit
Example: Using a spurious argument, John convinced the others that he had won the board game on a technicality.

STAGNATE
Definition: to become or remain inactive, not develop, not flow
Synonyms: stall, deteriorate, decline
Example: With no room for advancement, the waiter's career stagnated.

STAID
Definition: sedate, serious, self-restrained
Synonyms: serious, sedate, sober
Example: The staid butler never changed his expression no matter what happened.

STINGY
Definition: not generous, not inclined to spend or give
Synonyms: miserly, cheap, tight-fisted
Example: Scrooge's stingy habits did not fit with the generous, giving spirit of Christmas.

STOIC
Definition: unaffected by passion or feeling
Synonyms: impassive, unemotional, resigned
Example: Penelope's faithfulness to Odysseus required that she be stoic and put off her many suitors.

STOLID
Definition: expressing little sensibility, unemotional
Synonyms: unemotional, impassive, phlegmatic
Example: Charles's stolid reaction to his wife's funeral differed from the passion he showed at the time of her death.

STRENUOUS
Definition: requiring tremendous energy or stamina
Synonyms: arduous, demanding, exhausting
Example: Running a marathon is quite a strenuous task.

STRIDENT
Definition: harsh, loud
Synonyms: harsh, grating, shrill
Example: A strident man, Captain Von Trapp yelled at his daughter and made her cry.

STUPEFY
Definition: to astonish, make insensible
Synonyms: astound, stun, amaze
Example: Veronica's audacity and ungratefulness stupefied her best friend, Heather.

SUBJUGATE
Definition: to bring under control, subdue
Synonyms: conquer, dominate, enslave
Example: The invading force captured and subjugated the natives of that place.

SUBLIME
Definition: lofty, grand, exalted
Synonyms: magnificent, glorious, elevated
Example: The homeless man sadly pondered his former wealth and once sublime existence.

SUBMISSIVE
Definition: easily yielding to authority
Synonyms: obedient, compliant, docile
Example: In some cultures, wives are supposed to be submissive and support their husbands in all matters.

SUCCINCT
Definition: marked by compact precision
Synonyms: concise, brief, terse
Example: The governor's succinct speech energized the crowd while the mayor's rambled on and on.

SUPERFLUOUS
Definition: exceeding what is necessary
Synonyms: excessive, unnecessary, redundant
Example: Tracy had already won the campaign so her constant flattery of others was superfluous.

SURFEIT
Definition: an overabundant supply or indulgence
Synonyms: excess, surplus, overabundance
Example: After partaking of the surfeit of tacos and tamales at the All-You-Can-Eat Taco Tamale Lunch Special, Beth felt rather sick.

SURMISE
Definition: to infer with little evidence
Synonyms: guess, conjecture, speculate
Example: After speaking to only one of the students, the teacher was able to surmise what had caused the fight.

SURREPTITIOUS
Definition: stealthy
Synonyms: secret, covert, furtive
Example: The surreptitious CIA agents were able to get in and out of the house without anyone noticing.

SURROGATE
Definition: one acting in place of another
Synonyms: substitute, replacement, proxy
Example: The surrogate carried the child to term for its biological parents.

SWARTHY
Definition: of dark color or complexion
Synonyms: dark, dusky, tanned
Example: When he got drunk, Robinson's white skin became rather swarthy.

SYCOPHANT
Definition: one who flatters for self-gain
Synonyms: flatterer, toady, yes-man
Example: Some see the people in the cabinet as the president's closest advisors, but others see them as sycophants.

TACIT
Definition: expressed without words
Synonyms: implicit, unspoken, understood
Example: I interpreted my parents' refusal to talk as a tacit acceptance of my request.

TACITURN
Definition: not inclined to talk
Synonyms: reserved, reticent, quiet
Example: Though Jane never seems to stop talking, her brother is quite taciturn.

TANGENTIAL
Definition: incidental, peripheral, divergent
Synonyms: irrelevant, peripheral, digressive
Example: I tried to discuss my salary, but the boss kept veering off into tangential topics.

TANTAMOUNT
Definition: equivalent in value or significance
Synonyms: equivalent, equal, same
Example: When it comes to sports, fearing your opponent is tantamount to losing.

TEDIOUS
Definition: dull, boring
Synonyms: boring, monotonous, tiresome
Example: As time passed and the history professor continued to drone on and on, the lecture became increasingly tedious.

TEMERITY
Definition: audacity, recklessness
Synonyms: boldness, audacity, nerve
Example: Tom and Huck entered the scary cave armed with nothing but their own temerity.

TEMPERANCE
Definition: moderation in action or thought
Synonyms: moderation, restraint, self-control
Example: Maintaining temperance will ensure that you are able to think rationally and objectively.

TENABLE
Definition: able to be defended or maintained
Synonyms: defensible, justifiable, reasonable
Example: The department heads tore down the arguments in other people's theses, but Johari's work proved to be quite tenable.

TENUOUS
Definition: having little substance or strength
Synonyms: weak, flimsy, fragile
Example: Your argument is very tenuous, since it relies so much on speculation and hearsay.

TERRESTRIAL
Definition: relating to the land
Synonyms: earthly, land-based, worldly
Example: Elephants are terrestrial animals.

TIMOROUS
Definition: timid, fearful
Synonyms: timid, fearful, shy
Example: When dealing with the unknown, timorous Tallulah almost always broke into tears.

TIRADE
Definition: a long speech marked by harsh or biting language
Synonyms: diatribe, rant, harangue
Example: Every time Jessica was late, her boyfriend went into a long tirade about punctuality.

TOADY
Definition: one who flatters in the hope of gaining favors
Synonyms: sycophant, flatterer, brown-noser
Example: The other kids referred to the teacher's pet as the Tenth Grade Toady.

TOME
Definition: a large book
Synonyms: volume, book, work
Example: In college, I used to carry around an anatomy book that was the heaviest tome in my bag.

TORPID
Definition: lethargic, dormant, lacking motion
Synonyms: sluggish, lethargic, inactive
Example: The torpid whale floated, wallowing in the water for hours.

TORRID
Definition: giving off intense heat, passionate
Synonyms: hot, scorching, passionate
Example: I didn't want to witness the neighbor's torrid affair through the window.

TORTUOUS
Definition: winding
Synonyms: winding, twisting, serpentine
Example: The scary thing about driving in mountains are the narrow, tortuous roads.

TRACTABLE
Definition: easily controlled
Synonyms: manageable, compliant, docile
Example: The horse was so tractable, Myra didn't even need a bridle.

TRANQUIL
Definition: calm
Synonyms: peaceful, serene, calm
Example: There is a time of night when nothing moves and everything is tranquil.

TRANSGRESS
Definition: to violate, go over a limit
Synonyms: violate, breach, overstep
Example: The criminal's actions transgressed morality and human decency.

TRANSIENT
Definition: passing through briefly; passing into and out of existence
Synonyms: temporary, fleeting, ephemeral
Example: Because virtually everyone in Palm Beach is a tourist, the population of the town is quite transient.

TRANSMUTE
Definition: to change or alter in form
Synonyms: transform, convert, change
Example: Ancient alchemists believed that it was possible to transmute lead into gold.

TRAVESTY
Definition: a grossly inferior imitation
Synonyms: mockery, parody, farce
Example: According to the school newspaper's merciless theater critic, Pacific Coast High's rendition of the musical Oklahoma was a travesty of the original.

TREMULOUS
Definition: fearful
Synonyms: trembling, shaky, fearful
Example: I always feel a trifle tremulous when walking through a graveyard.

TRENCHANT
Definition: effective, articulate, clear-cut
Synonyms: incisive, sharp, effective
Example: The directions that accompanied my new cell phone were trenchant and easy to follow.

TREPIDATION
Definition: fear, apprehension
Synonyms: fear, anxiety, apprehension
Example: Feeling great trepidation, Anya refused to jump into the pool because she thought she saw a shark in it.

TRITE
Definition: not original, overused
Synonyms: banal, clichéd, hackneyed
Example: Keith thought of himself as being very learned, but everyone else thought he was trite because his observations about the world were always the same as David Letterman's.

TRUCULENT
Definition: ready to fight, cruel
Synonyms: aggressive, belligerent, hostile
Example: This club doesn't really attract the dangerous types, so why was that bouncer being so truculent?

TRUNCATE
Definition: to shorten by cutting off
Synonyms: shorten, abbreviate, cut
Example: After winning the derby, the jockey truncated the long speech he had planned and thanked only his mom and his horse.

TURGID
Definition: swollen, excessively embellished in style or language
Synonyms: pompous, bombastic, inflated
Example: The haughty writer did not realize how we all really felt about his turgid prose.

TURPITUDE
Definition: depravity, moral corruption
Synonyms: wickedness, depravity, immorality
Example: Sir Marcus's chivalry often contrasted with the turpitude he exhibited with the ladies at the tavern.

UBIQUITOUS
Definition: existing everywhere, widespread
Synonyms: omnipresent, pervasive, everywhere
Example: It seems that everyone in the United States has a television. The technology is ubiquitous here.

UMBRAGE
Definition: resentment, offense
Synonyms: offense, resentment, displeasure
Example: He called me a lily-livered coward, and I took umbrage at the insult.

UNCANNY
Definition: of supernatural character or origin
Synonyms: eerie, mysterious, strange
Example: Luka had an uncanny ability to know exactly what other people were thinking.

UNCTUOUS
Definition: smooth or greasy in texture, appearance, manner
Synonyms: oily, smarmy, ingratiating
Example: The unctuous receptionist seemed untrustworthy, as if she was only being helpful because she thought we might give her a big tip.

UNDULATE
Definition: to move in waves
Synonyms: wave, ripple, fluctuate
Example: As the storm began to brew, the placid ocean began to undulate to an increasing degree.

UPBRAID
Definition: to criticize or scold severely
Synonyms: scold, reprimand, rebuke
Example: The last thing Lindsay wanted was for Lisa to upbraid her again about missing the rent payment.

USURP
Definition: to seize by force, take possession of without right
Synonyms: seize, take over, commandeer
Example: The rogue army general tried to usurp control of the government, but he failed because most of the army backed the legally elected president.

UTILITARIAN
Definition: relating to or aiming at usefulness
Synonyms: practical, functional, useful
Example: The beautiful, fragile vase couldn't hold flowers or serve any other utilitarian purpose.

UTOPIA
Definition: an imaginary and remote place of perfection
Synonyms: paradise, ideal place, heaven
Example: Everyone in the world wants to live in a utopia, but no one can agree how to go about building one.

VACILLATE
Definition: to fluctuate, hesitate
Synonyms: waver, fluctuate, hesitate
Example: I prefer a definite answer, but my boss kept vacillating between the distinct options available to us.

VACUOUS
Definition: lack of content or ideas, stupid
Synonyms: empty, mindless, inane
Example: Beyonce realized that the lyrics she had just penned were completely vacuous and tried to add more substance.

VALIDATE
Definition: to confirm, support, corroborate
Synonyms: confirm, verify, authenticate
Example: Yoko's chemistry lab partner was asleep during the experiment and could not validate the accuracy of her methods.

VAPID
Definition: lacking liveliness, dull
Synonyms: dull, insipid, bland
Example: The professor's comments about the poem were surprisingly vapid and dull.

VARIEGATED
Definition: diversified, distinctly marked
Synonyms: varied, diverse, multicolored
Example: Each wire in the engineering exam was variegated by color so that the students could figure out which one was which.

VEHEMENTLY
Definition: marked by intense force or emotion
Synonyms: forcefully, passionately, intensely
Example: The candidate vehemently opposed cutting back on Social Security funding.

VENEER
Definition: a superficial or deceptively attractive appearance, façade
Synonyms: facade, surface, appearance
Example: Thanks to her Chanel makeup, Shannen was able to maintain a veneer of perfection that hid the flaws underneath.

VENERABLE
Definition: deserving of respect because of age or achievement
Synonyms: respected, revered, esteemed
Example: The venerable Supreme Court justice had made several key rulings in landmark cases throughout the years.

VENERATE
Definition: to regard with respect or to honor
Synonyms: revere, respect, honor
Example: The tribute to John Lennon sought to venerate his music, his words, and his legend.

VERACITY
Definition: truthfulness, accuracy
Synonyms: truthfulness, accuracy, honesty
Example: With several agencies regulating the reports, it was difficult for Latifah to argue against its veracity.

VERBOSE
Definition: wordy, impaired by wordiness
Synonyms: wordy, long-winded, prolix
Example: It took the verbose teacher two hours to explain the topic, while it should have taken only fifteen minutes.

VERDANT
Definition: green in tint or color
Synonyms: green, lush, flourishing
Example: The verdant leaves on the trees made the world look emerald.

VESTIGE
Definition: a mark or trace of something lost or vanished
Synonyms: trace, remnant, relic
Example: Do you know if the Mexican tortilla is a vestige of some form of Aztec corn-based flat bread?

VEX
Definition: to confuse or annoy
Synonyms: annoy, irritate, frustrate
Example: My little brother vexes me by poking me in the ribs for hours on end.

VICARIOUS
Definition: experiencing through another
Synonyms: indirect, secondhand, substituted
Example: All of my lame friends learned to be social through vicarious involvement in my amazing experiences.

VICISSITUDE
Definition: event that occurs by chance
Synonyms: change, variation, fluctuation
Example: The vicissitudes of daily life prevent me from predicting what might happen from one day to the next.

VIGILANT
Definition: watchful, alert
Synonyms: watchful, alert, attentive
Example: The guards remained vigilant throughout the night, but the enemy never launched the expected attack.

VILIFY
Definition: to lower in importance, defame
Synonyms: defame, slander, malign
Example: After the Watergate scandal, almost any story written about President Nixon sought to vilify him and criticize his behavior.

VINDICATE
Definition: to avenge; to free from allegation; to set free
Synonyms: exonerate, clear, absolve
Example: The attorney had no chance of vindicating the defendant with all of the strong evidence presented by the state.

VINDICTIVE
Definition: vengeful
Synonyms: vengeful, spiteful, revengeful
Example: The vindictive madman seeks to exact vengeance for any insult that he perceives is directed at him, no matter how small.

VIRTUOSO
Definition: one who excels in an art; a highly skilled musical performer
Synonyms: expert, master, prodigy
Example: Even though Lydia has studied piano for many years, she's only average at it. She's no virtuoso, that's for sure.

VISCOUS
Definition: not free flowing, syrupy
Synonyms: thick, sticky, syrupy
Example: The viscous syrup took three minutes to pour out of the bottle.

VITRIOLIC
Definition: having a caustic quality
Synonyms: bitter, scathing, caustic
Example: When angry, the woman would spew vitriolic insults.

VITUPERATE
Definition: to berate
Synonyms: berate, scold, rebuke
Example: Jack ran away as soon as his father found out, knowing he would be vituperated for his unseemly behavior.

VIVACIOUS
Definition: lively, sprightly
Synonyms: lively, animated, spirited
Example: The vivacious clown makes all of the children laugh and giggle with his friendly antics.

VOCATION
Definition: the work in which someone is employed, profession
Synonyms: profession, occupation, calling
Example: After growing tired of the superficial world of high-fashion, Edwina decided to devote herself to a new vocation: social work.

VOCIFEROUS
Definition: loud, boisterous
Synonyms: loud, clamorous, vehement
Example: I'm tired of his vociferous whining so I'm breaking up with him.

WALLOW
Definition: to roll oneself indolently; to become or remain helpless
Synonyms: indulge, luxuriate, revel
Example: My roommate can't get over her breakup with her boyfriend and now just wallows in self-pity.

WANE
Definition: to decrease in size, dwindle
Synonyms: decline, diminish, decrease
Example: Don't be so afraid of his wrath because his influence with the president is already beginning to wane.

WANTON
Definition: undisciplined, lewd, lustful
Synonyms: reckless, unrestrained, wild
Example: Vicky's wanton demeanor often made the frat guys next door very excited.

WHIMSICAL
Definition: fanciful, full of whims
Synonyms: playful, fanciful, capricious
Example: The whimsical little girl liked to pretend that she was an elvin princess.

WILY
Definition: crafty, sly
Synonyms: cunning, crafty, shrewd
Example: Though they were not the strongest of the Thundercats, wily Kit and Kat were definitely the most clever and full of tricks.

WINSOME
Definition: charming, pleasing
Synonyms: charming, appealing, engaging
Example: After such a long, frustrating day, I was grateful for Chris's winsome attitude and childish naivete.

WISTFUL
Definition: full of yearning; musingly sad
Synonyms: yearning, nostalgic, melancholy
Example: Since her pet rabbit died, Edda missed it terribly and sat around wistful all day long.

WIZENED
Definition: dry, shrunken, wrinkled
Synonyms: shriveled, withered, wrinkled
Example: Agatha's grandmother, Stephanie, had the most wizened countenance, full of leathery wrinkles.

WRATH
Definition: vengeful anger, punishment
Synonyms: anger, rage, fury
Example: Did you really want to incur her wrath when she is known for inflicting the worst punishments legally possible?

YOKE
Definition: to join, link
Synonyms: join, unite, connect
Example: We yoked together the logs by tying a string around them.

ZEALOUS
Definition: fervent, filled with eagerness in pursuit of something
Synonyms: enthusiastic, fervent, passionate
Example: If he were any more zealous about getting his promotion, he'd practically live at the office.

ZENITH
Definition: the highest point, culminating point
Synonyms: peak, apex, summit
Example: I was too nice to tell Nelly that she had reached the absolute zenith of her career with that one hit of hers.

ZEPHYR
Definition: a gentle breeze
Synonyms: breeze, wind, draft
Example: If not for the zephyrs that were blowing and cooling us, our room would've been unbearably hot.

================================================================================
End of SAT Vocabulary Reference